README.md, before:

# RiemannOpt

[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/riemannopt)](https://crates.io/crates/riemannopt)
[![Documentation](https://docs.rs/riemannopt/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/riemannopt)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt)

**RiemannOpt** is a high-performance Riemannian optimization library written in Rust, providing state-of-the-art algorithms for optimization on manifolds. It offers a modern, type-safe API with first-class Python bindings, making it accessible to both researchers and practitioners in machine learning, computer vision, and scientific computing.

## 🎯 Motivation

Many problems in machine learning and scientific computing involve constraints that naturally form smooth manifolds:

- **Neural Networks**: Weight matrices with orthogonality constraints (Stiefel manifold)
- **Computer Vision**: Rotation matrices in 3D reconstruction (SO(3) manifold)
- **Dimensionality Reduction**: Low-rank approximations (Grassmann manifold)
- **Natural Language Processing**: Hyperbolic embeddings for hierarchical data
- **Quantum Computing**: Unitary matrices for quantum gates
- **Robotics**: Configuration spaces with geometric constraints

Traditional optimization methods require expensive projection steps or Lagrange multipliers to handle these constraints. **RiemannOpt** leverages the geometric structure of manifolds to provide efficient, projection-free optimization that naturally respects constraints.

## 🚀 Key Features

### Performance
- **10-100x faster** than pure Python implementations
- Zero-cost abstractions with Rust's ownership system
- SIMD optimizations for matrix operations
- Optional GPU acceleration via CUDA
- Minimal memory allocations with buffer reuse

### Mathematical Rigor
- Geometrically correct algorithms with convergence guarantees
- Multiple retraction methods with configurable accuracy/speed tradeoffs
- Proper parallel transport for momentum-based methods
- Extensive property-based testing
- Numerical stability checks throughout

### Ease of Use
- Intuitive API inspired by PyTorch optimizers
- Comprehensive documentation with mathematical background
- First-class Python bindings with type hints
- Extensive examples and tutorials
- Compatible with NumPy, PyTorch, and JAX

### Extensibility
- Modular architecture for easy customization
- Trait-based design for adding new manifolds
- Plugin system for custom optimizers
- Composable manifolds (products, quotients)
- Open source with permissive MIT license

## 📦 Installation

### Rust

Add to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
riemannopt = "0.1"
```

For additional features:

```toml
[dependencies]
riemannopt = { version = "0.1", features = ["parallel", "serde"] }
```

### Python

Install via pip:

```bash
pip install riemannopt
```

Or with optional dependencies:

```bash
pip install riemannopt[torch,jax]  # For PyTorch/JAX integration
```

## 🔧 Quick Start

### Rust Example

```rust
use riemannopt::prelude::*;
use riemannopt::manifolds::Stiefel;
use riemannopt::optimizers::{RiemannianSGD, SGDConfig};
use nalgebra::DMatrix;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Create a Stiefel manifold St(10, 3)
    let manifold = Stiefel::new(10, 3)?;
    
    // Initialize a random point on the manifold
    let mut x = manifold.random_point();
    
    // Configure optimizer
    let config = SGDConfig {
        learning_rate: 0.1,
        momentum: 0.9,
        ..Default::default()
    };
    let mut optimizer = RiemannianSGD::new(config);
    
    // Define cost function (example: Rayleigh quotient)
    let a = DMatrix::<f64>::new_random(10, 10);
    let a = &a * a.transpose(); // Make symmetric
    
    let cost_fn = |x: &DMatrix<f64>| {
        let ax = &a * x;
        let cost = (x.transpose() * &ax).trace();
        let gradient = 2.0 * ax;
        (cost, gradient)
    };
    
    // Optimization loop
    let mut state = SGDState::default();
    for i in 0..100 {
        let info = optimizer.step(&manifold, cost_fn, &mut x, &mut state)?;
        
        if i % 10 == 0 {
            println!(
                "Iteration {}: cost = {:.6}, gradient norm = {:.6}", 
                i, info.cost, info.gradient_norm
            );
        }
    }
    
    Ok(())
}
```

### Python Example

```python
import numpy as np
import riemannopt as ro

# Create a Stiefel manifold St(10, 3)
manifold = ro.Stiefel(10, 3)

# Initialize a random point
x = manifold.random_point()

# Configure optimizer
optimizer = ro.SGD(learning_rate=0.1, momentum=0.9)

# Define cost function (Rayleigh quotient)
A = np.random.randn(10, 10)
A = A @ A.T  # Make symmetric

def cost_fn(x):
    cost = np.trace(x.T @ A @ x)
    gradient = 2 * A @ x
    return cost, gradient

# Optimization loop
for i in range(100):
    cost, grad = cost_fn(x)
    x = optimizer.step(manifold, x, grad)
    
    if i % 10 == 0:
        print(f"Iteration {i}: cost = {cost:.6f}")
```

## 📚 Supported Manifolds

| Manifold | Description | Applications |
|----------|-------------|--------------|
| **Sphere** | Unit sphere S^{n-1} | Normalized embeddings, directional statistics |
| **Stiefel** | Orthonormal matrices St(n,p) | Neural network constraints, PCA |
| **Grassmann** | Subspaces Gr(n,p) | Subspace tracking, computer vision |
| **SPD** | Symmetric positive definite matrices | Covariance estimation, metric learning |
| **Hyperbolic** | Hyperbolic space H^n | Hierarchical embeddings, tree-like data |
| **SO(n)** | Special orthogonal group | Rotations, robotics, 3D vision |
| **Product** | Cartesian products | Multi-task learning, complex constraints |

## 🛠️ Supported Optimizers

| Algorithm | Type | Best For |
|-----------|------|----------|
| **SGD** | First-order | Large-scale problems, online learning |
| **Adam** | Adaptive first-order | Non-stationary objectives, deep learning |
| **L-BFGS** | Quasi-Newton | Small-medium problems, high accuracy |
| **Trust Region** | Second-order | Robust convergence, ill-conditioned problems |
| **CG** | First-order | Large-scale, sparse problems |

## 🏗️ Architecture

RiemannOpt follows a modular architecture:

```
riemannopt/
├── riemannopt-core/      # Core traits and types
├── riemannopt-manifolds/ # Manifold implementations
├── riemannopt-optim/     # Optimization algorithms
├── riemannopt-autodiff/  # Automatic differentiation
└── riemannopt-py/        # Python bindings
```

This design allows you to:
- Use only the components you need
- Easily extend with custom manifolds
- Minimize dependencies
- Maintain type safety

## 🔬 Mathematical Background

RiemannOpt implements optimization on Riemannian manifolds, which are smooth spaces with a notion of distance and angles. Key concepts:

- **Tangent Spaces**: Linear approximations of the manifold at each point
- **Riemannian Metric**: Inner product on tangent spaces
- **Geodesics**: Shortest paths on the manifold
- **Parallel Transport**: Moving vectors along curves while preserving angles
- **Retractions**: Smooth maps from tangent spaces to the manifold

For detailed mathematical exposition, see our [documentation](https://docs.rs/riemannopt).

## 📊 Benchmarks

Performance comparison with existing libraries (lower is better):

| Operation | RiemannOpt | Pymanopt | Manopt.jl | Speedup |
|-----------|------------|----------|-----------|---------|
| Stiefel Retraction (100×10) | 0.8 μs | 45 μs | 12 μs | 56x |
| Grassmann Log (50×10) | 2.1 μs | 89 μs | 18 μs | 42x |
| SPD Metric (20×20) | 1.5 μs | 67 μs | 15 μs | 45x |
| Full SGD Step | 5.2 μs | 234 μs | 48 μs | 45x |

Benchmarks run on: Intel i9-12900K, 32GB RAM, Ubuntu 22.04

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

Areas where we especially welcome help:
- Implementing additional manifolds
- Optimizing existing algorithms
- Improving documentation
- Creating examples and tutorials
- Reporting bugs and suggesting features

## 📖 Documentation

- [API Documentation](https://docs.rs/riemannopt)
- [User Guide](https://denischpt.github.io/RiemannOpt/)
- [Mathematical Background](docs/math.md)
- [Performance Guide](docs/performance.md)
- [FAQ](docs/faq.md)

## 🎓 Citation

If you use RiemannOpt in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{riemannopt2025,
  author = {Chaput, Denis},
  title = {RiemannOpt: High-Performance Riemannian Optimization in Rust},
  year = {2025},
  url = {https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt}
}
```

## 📄 License

RiemannOpt is licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

RiemannOpt is inspired by several excellent projects:
- [Manopt](https://www.manopt.org/) (MATLAB)
- [Pymanopt](https://pymanopt.org/) (Python)
- [Geomstats](https://geomstats.github.io/) (Python)
- [Manifolds.jl](https://juliamanifolds.github.io/Manifolds.jl/) (Julia)

## 🗺️ Roadmap

- [ ] Core manifolds and optimizers
- [ ] Python bindings
- [ ] GPU acceleration
- [ ] Automatic differentiation
- [ ] Distributed optimization
- [ ] Integration with deep learning frameworks
- [ ] Riemannian neural networks

## 📬 Contact

- **Author**: Denis Chaput
- **Email**: denis.chaput77@gmail.com
- **GitHub**: [@DenisChpt](https://github.com/DenisChpt)

For questions and discussions, please use [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/issues) or [Discussions](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/discussions).

Commit message:

Refactor Riemannian optimization library: - Removed unused imports and cleaned up code in manifold modules. - Updated tangent projection method in PSD cone manifold to ignore unused point parameter. - Enhanced Newton optimizer to handle various manifold types and added shape handling for matrix outputs. - Introduced a cost function wrapper for matrix-based cost functions to ensure compatibility with vector-based optimizers. - Added README documentation for RiemannOpt library, detailing features, usage, and examples. - Removed outdated example files related to Adam and SGD optimizers on spheres. - Implemented unit tests for Newton optimizer with matrix cost function compatibility.

README.md, after:

# RiemannOpt

[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/riemannopt)](https://crates.io/crates/riemannopt)
[![Documentation](https://docs.rs/riemannopt/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/riemannopt)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt)

**RiemannOpt** is a high-performance Riemannian optimization library written in Rust, providing state-of-the-art algorithms for optimization on manifolds. It offers a modern, type-safe API with first-class Python bindings, making it accessible to both researchers and practitioners in machine learning, computer vision, and scientific computing.

## 🎯 Motivation

Many problems in machine learning and scientific computing involve constraints that naturally form smooth manifolds:

- **Neural Networks**: Weight matrices with orthogonality constraints (Stiefel manifold)
- **Computer Vision**: Rotation matrices in 3D reconstruction (SO(3) manifold)
- **Dimensionality Reduction**: Low-rank approximations (Grassmann manifold)
- **Natural Language Processing**: Hyperbolic embeddings for hierarchical data
- **Quantum Computing**: Unitary matrices for quantum gates
- **Robotics**: Configuration spaces with geometric constraints

Traditional optimization methods require expensive projection steps or Lagrange multipliers to handle these constraints. **RiemannOpt** leverages the geometric structure of manifolds to provide efficient, projection-free optimization that naturally respects constraints.

## 🚀 Key Features

### Performance
- **10-100x faster** than pure Python implementations
- Zero-cost abstractions with Rust's ownership system
- SIMD optimizations for matrix operations (AVX2/AVX-512)
- CPU parallel computing with Rayon for batch operations
- Optional GPU acceleration via CUDA with memory pooling
- Minimal memory allocations with buffer reuse

### Mathematical Rigor
- Geometrically correct algorithms with convergence guarantees
- Multiple retraction methods with configurable accuracy/speed tradeoffs
- Proper parallel transport for momentum-based methods
- Extensive property-based testing
- Numerical stability checks throughout

### Ease of Use
- Intuitive API inspired by PyTorch optimizers
- Comprehensive documentation with mathematical background
- First-class Python bindings with type hints
- Extensive examples and tutorials
- Compatible with NumPy, PyTorch, and JAX

### Extensibility
- Modular architecture for easy customization
- Trait-based design for adding new manifolds
- Plugin system for custom optimizers
- Composable manifolds (products, quotients)
- Open source with permissive MIT license

## 📦 Installation

### Rust

Add to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
riemannopt = "0.1"
```

For additional features:

```toml
[dependencies]
riemannopt = { version = "0.1", features = ["parallel", "serde"] }
```

### Python

Install via pip:

```bash
pip install riemannopt
```

Or with optional dependencies:

```bash
pip install riemannopt[torch,jax]  # For PyTorch/JAX integration
```

## 🔧 Quick Start

### Rust Example

```rust
use riemannopt::prelude::*;
use riemannopt::manifolds::Stiefel;
use riemannopt::optimizers::{RiemannianSGD, SGDConfig};
use nalgebra::DMatrix;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Create a Stiefel manifold St(10, 3)
    let manifold = Stiefel::new(10, 3)?;
    
    // Initialize a random point on the manifold
    let mut x = manifold.random_point();
    
    // Configure optimizer
    let config = SGDConfig {
        learning_rate: 0.1,
        momentum: 0.9,
        ..Default::default()
    };
    let mut optimizer = RiemannianSGD::new(config);
    
    // Define cost function (example: Rayleigh quotient)
    let a = DMatrix::<f64>::new_random(10, 10);
    let a = &a * a.transpose(); // Make symmetric
    
    let cost_fn = |x: &DMatrix<f64>| {
        let ax = &a * x;
        let cost = (x.transpose() * &ax).trace();
        let gradient = 2.0 * ax;
        (cost, gradient)
    };
    
    // Optimization loop
    let mut state = SGDState::default();
    for i in 0..100 {
        let info = optimizer.step(&manifold, cost_fn, &mut x, &mut state)?;
        
        if i % 10 == 0 {
            println!(
                "Iteration {}: cost = {:.6}, gradient norm = {:.6}", 
                i, info.cost, info.gradient_norm
            );
        }
    }
    
    Ok(())
}
```

### Python Example

```python
import numpy as np
import riemannopt as ro

# Create a Stiefel manifold St(10, 3)
manifold = ro.Stiefel(10, 3)

# Initialize a random point
x = manifold.random_point()

# Configure optimizer
optimizer = ro.SGD(learning_rate=0.1, momentum=0.9)

# Define cost function (Rayleigh quotient)
A = np.random.randn(10, 10)
A = A @ A.T  # Make symmetric

def cost_fn(x):
    cost = np.trace(x.T @ A @ x)
    gradient = 2 * A @ x
    return cost, gradient

# Optimization loop
for i in range(100):
    cost, grad = cost_fn(x)
    x = optimizer.step(manifold, x, grad)
    
    if i % 10 == 0:
        print(f"Iteration {i}: cost = {cost:.6f}")
```

## 📚 Supported Manifolds

| Manifold | Description | Applications |
|----------|-------------|--------------|
| **Sphere** | Unit sphere S^{n-1} | Normalized embeddings, directional statistics |
| **Stiefel** | Orthonormal matrices St(n,p) | Neural network constraints, PCA |
| **Grassmann** | Subspaces Gr(n,p) | Subspace tracking, computer vision |
| **SPD** | Symmetric positive definite matrices | Covariance estimation, metric learning |
| **Hyperbolic** | Hyperbolic space H^n | Hierarchical embeddings, tree-like data |
| **SO(n)** | Special orthogonal group | Rotations, robotics, 3D vision |
| **Product** | Cartesian products | Multi-task learning, complex constraints |

## 🛠️ Supported Optimizers

| Algorithm | Type | Best For |
|-----------|------|----------|
| **SGD** | First-order | Large-scale problems, online learning |
| **Adam** | Adaptive first-order | Non-stationary objectives, deep learning |
| **L-BFGS** | Quasi-Newton | Small-medium problems, high accuracy |
| **Trust Region** | Second-order | Robust convergence, ill-conditioned problems |
| **CG** | First-order | Large-scale, sparse problems |

## 🏗️ Architecture

RiemannOpt follows a modular architecture:

```
riemannopt/
├── riemannopt-core/      # Core traits and types
├── riemannopt-manifolds/ # Manifold implementations
├── riemannopt-optim/     # Optimization algorithms
├── riemannopt-autodiff/  # Automatic differentiation
└── riemannopt-py/        # Python bindings
```

This design allows you to:
- Use only the components you need
- Easily extend with custom manifolds
- Minimize dependencies
- Maintain type safety

## 🔬 Mathematical Background

RiemannOpt implements optimization on Riemannian manifolds, which are smooth spaces with a notion of distance and angles. Key concepts:

- **Tangent Spaces**: Linear approximations of the manifold at each point
- **Riemannian Metric**: Inner product on tangent spaces
- **Geodesics**: Shortest paths on the manifold
- **Parallel Transport**: Moving vectors along curves while preserving angles
- **Retractions**: Smooth maps from tangent spaces to the manifold

For detailed mathematical exposition, see our [documentation](https://docs.rs/riemannopt).

## 📊 Benchmarks

Performance comparison with existing libraries (lower is better):

| Operation | RiemannOpt | Pymanopt | Manopt.jl | Speedup |
|-----------|------------|----------|-----------|---------|
| Stiefel Retraction (100×10) | 0.8 μs | 45 μs | 12 μs | 56x |
| Grassmann Log (50×10) | 2.1 μs | 89 μs | 18 μs | 42x |
| SPD Metric (20×20) | 1.5 μs | 67 μs | 15 μs | 45x |
| Full SGD Step | 5.2 μs | 234 μs | 48 μs | 45x |

Benchmarks run on: Intel i9-12900K, 32GB RAM, Ubuntu 22.04

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

Areas where we especially welcome help:
- Implementing additional manifolds
- Optimizing existing algorithms
- Improving documentation
- Creating examples and tutorials
- Reporting bugs and suggesting features

## 📖 Documentation

- [API Documentation](https://docs.rs/riemannopt)
- [User Guide](https://denischpt.github.io/RiemannOpt/)
- [Mathematical Background](docs/math.md)
- [Performance Guide](docs/performance.md)
- [FAQ](docs/faq.md)

## 🎓 Citation

If you use RiemannOpt in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{riemannopt2025,
  author = {Chaput, Denis},
  title = {RiemannOpt: High-Performance Riemannian Optimization in Rust},
  year = {2025},
  url = {https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt}
}
```

## 📄 License

RiemannOpt is licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

RiemannOpt is inspired by several excellent projects:
- [Manopt](https://www.manopt.org/) (MATLAB)
- [Pymanopt](https://pymanopt.org/) (Python)
- [Geomstats](https://geomstats.github.io/) (Python)
- [Manifolds.jl](https://juliamanifolds.github.io/Manifolds.jl/) (Julia)

## 🗺️ Roadmap

- [ ] Core manifolds and optimizers
- [ ] Python bindings
- [ ] GPU acceleration
- [ ] Automatic differentiation
- [ ] Distributed optimization
- [ ] Integration with deep learning frameworks
- [ ] Riemannian neural networks

## 📬 Contact

- **Author**: Denis Chaput
- **Email**: denis.chaput77@gmail.com
- **GitHub**: [@DenisChpt](https://github.com/DenisChpt)

For questions and discussions, please use [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/issues) or [Discussions](https://github.com/DenisChpt/RiemannOpt/discussions).
